[Music]
hello and welcome to the natural state
podcast I'm your host dr. Anthony Gustin
it is my belief that the natural state
of any living organisms health and that
our artificial habitat has forced us
into having artificial health problems
this show is my attempt to dive deep and
learn about using nutrition sleep
movement relationships and more to help
you reclaim your natural state of health
in a modern world and show you how to
thrive in an environment that's stacked
against you if you enjoyed today's show
you can find out more details and
information at dr. Anthony Gustin com
today we have Travis Kristofferson on
the show who is the author of two
different books that are some of my
favorite in the health space one is
called tripping over the truth which is
all about the metabolic origins of
cancer over this book I think in 2015
and changed my mind a lot of things
regarding cancer and him in Thomas
Seyfried who's also been on the show
before and sort of pioneers pushing the
step forward even though there are old
ideas so we dig into that book and chat
about some of the things that people can
do regarding cancer treatment cancer
diagnosis etc and then his new book is
called curable which is all about how
messed up the healthcare system is so if
you know anything about me and sort of
what fires me up won't be surprised that
we got into it in this episode and chat
a lot about you know healthcare why it's
so expensive what causes are and some of
the solutions that we think could be
applied to reduce some of the cost and
give you a little better
so a lot of mind-blowing staff thrown
around this episode and Travis is really
smart guy and I really respect him and
I'm super glad you come on the show to
share his information with you guys
before we get into today's episode I
wanted to tell you about how you can
directly support the show it is not free
to produce his podcasts and I don't want
to use the typical model of selling your
attention to sponsors to fund the show I
want you to be able to take all of my
health recommendations seriously without
wondering if I'm being paid to promote
something to you if you want to support
the team that is behind this podcast
heading over to either one of the brains
that I found it a perfect keto comm
we're equipped foods calm I've developed
the products for each of these companies
with my insanely high standards because
I couldn't find them anywhere else
perfect Quito offers everything you need
to support a whole food space ketogenic
diet from exogenous ketones helping
transition in Aikido and boost your
energy to super-clean collagen bars that
have been tested not to spike your blood
sugar it's literally the only bar that I
know of that won't and that's why I'm in
it over at equipped foods we take real
food ingredients seriously you'll find
only whole food ingredients like beef
protein powder sweet potato powder
grass-fed liver capsules and more if
it's your first time trying the products
at either one of these brands use code
natural state for 20% off your first
order and if you feel amazing focusing
on hundred-percent real foods awesome
these products are intended to support
proper foundation of health and
nutrition and they're not magic pills
alright enough of that let's get into
the show Travis that you've coming on
the show today hey thanks for having me
great to be here yeah yeah I've been a
fan of your work since your first book
to remember the truth talking about
cancer and which I'm sure will get into
you throughout the episode and then you
just REITs launched a book recently
called curable and I mean you the way
you can take a concept and pull it apart
and talk to people about these really
complicated health issues is it's
excellent but I was curious as far as
how you got started down this health
slant I mean it doesn't seem like your
backgrounds formally in that I keep
trained as a journalist or hard you get
started you know well my undergrad is
actually I had I had a degree in biology
with a minor in biochemistry and that
was my just loved it I when I got out of
high school had no clue what to do I
think I graduated the one-point-six
barely graduated and my first class in
college it was molecular biology 101 and
it was taught by this guy that sent the
first monkey into space he was a
Princeton guy it was just a brilliant
lecture he started off with the Big Bang
and how these elements were created and
supernovas you know we're conducive to
life and prebiotic chemistry and and
from that moment I was I was hooked
but you're right from that from that
path it was became very circuitous and I
you know deviated a little bit but I
always loved writing too and so later on
in my life I was sort of a
able to merge the two kind of rekindled
by my interest in science but working on
a master's degree and was able to
eventually write write that first book
okay and what exactly prompted you to
dive into that topic which is extremely
complicated and I think that your book
is sort of wanted a definitive texts on
pulling for the misconceptions around
cancer and diagnosis there you know it
was it was they gave me some latitude
when I was working on my master's name
let me do an independent study class and
so I did it on cancer theory and I was
just kind of perusing through books to
read on cancer theory and I just
stumbled on Tom Seyfried smut cancer is
a metabolic disease and I almost didn't
buy it it was absurdly expensive and I
think was seventy-five dollars like
Kindle and I remember kind of hovering
over the button and I finally pressed it
and over the next two days I just
devoured that book and was absolutely
dumbfounded that there was this
alternative theory of cancer with so
much robust evidence it goes back
hundreds of years really and in contrary
in contrast to what you know I had
learned in my undergrad my Master's
looking at cancer under the lens of a
somatic mutation theory so that really
you know that was a catalyst to launch
me into this kind of Detective style
journalism to put together tripping over
the truth yeah I mean we've had Tom in
the podcast me sort of delve into his
stuff a little bit but just for people
maybe who haven't caught that episode
and we give a brief overview of sort of
the thesis behind the book and what you
lay out there the thesis so Tom wrote
obviously the textbook in the textbook
lays out the evidence behind looking at
cancer not as a disease of somatic
mutations which is the way it's still
interpreted to this day that's called
the somatic mutation theory of cancer
but rather looking at cancer as a
mitochondrial metabolic disease in other
words Tom theory says that cancer is
precipitated by damage to the
mitochondria which are little organelles
in their cell that generate all of our
energy using oxygen and this damage then
trips this response called a retrograde
response which sort of reconfigures the
way
that the expects expression of genes in
the nucleus towards the cancer phenotype
and when it happens during this process
is the the cell is unable to defend
itself from oxidative stress so you get
these mutations and we see in cancer as
a what he calls an epiphenomenon or a
side effect of cancer so that's kind of
the the you know the thrust behind the
theory and in my book you know it's a
narrative of the scientists it really
did this work and it goes back why it
was such an interesting story to me is
it goes all the way back to this
brilliant german biochemist named otto
warburg who claimed the cancer was a
metabolic disease back in in the really
in the in the mid 20s and he was rid you
know he was so well thought of in the
20s that his theory carried some weight
and people listened to him but then his
DNA was discovered and it was known
there was mute asians and cancer cells
all eyes really turned at the genetic
theory of cancer and otto warburg died
in 1970 by the time he died you know his
theory was looked at is this kind of
really a scar in his career this over
simplistic view of cancer and he was
kind of ridiculed for it and then long
story short you know the 67 these 80s we
continue to try to map out these somatic
genes that we thought were causing
cancer that led to the Cancer Genome
Atlas Project which sequenced the entire
genomes of many types of tumors I think
10,000 ultimately before they it was
over they sequenced 10,000 and that led
to this sort of confusion of well this
is not the cannot be the whole picture
there has to be something else and so in
that void step guys like Tom Seyfried
and a few others that have proposed
these kind of alternative alternative
theories of what's driving cancer yeah I
mean I think that it's pretty
overwhelming you like the case in the
book to that what we're doing is not
really working very much yeah and then
that's you know I think anyone's gonna
argue with that since we there was a
definitive series of experiments in the
70s that locked down the somatic
mutation theory and that really drove
this era of what we call targeted
therapies he searched for small
molecules or biologics that really
hone in on what we thought were the you
know the jeddak genetic mutations
driving cancer and that's really been a
bust we have not I just saw a good
article on scientific America that
showed really you know we're still
dealing with the reduction in cancer
we're seeing now is still an artifact of
the reduction in smoking rates and if
you look at the death rates today
they're about the same as they were in
the 30s so when you when you add
everything together you know the war on
cancer has been a complete debacle and
so obviously I mean the way I think
about it at least is this sort of two
different buckets here one of them is
that you know obviously your rates of
cancer are increasing and then we have
this paradigm of origination that you
know you Tom say free you know warper
have sort of positioned it is not a DNA
mutation but something of metabolic
origin and then we also have treatment
to that and so obviously one affects the
other and so I mean as far as your
opinion on the rate of increase is it
just better detection is it an actual
change in our metabolism from vironment
so factors how do you think about that
yeah it's probably all the above you
know I think we've made our world more
carcinogenic without a doubt there's so
many more chemicals we're exposed to all
these problems of Western civilization
obesity type 3 diabetes these are all
correlated with increased cancer
incidence so it's probably you know it's
the amount of carcinogens we're exposed
to and combined with the fact we're
metabolically less healthy which is
correlated to increase cancer rates over
time too so yeah all of the above and
then obviously that affects you know if
we have different ideas and how the
origin comes to be then the treatments
going to be very different as well right
right once you understand what what is
you know not just the origin but what's
propagating the Z's you can start to
target those different anomalies within
the cell and yeah that that's where
that's where we have this lag period
that we lost so much time we should have
been doing this for a long time trying
to target cancer through metabolism
and you know I think Tom has really done
the most to precipitate this kind of new
look at targeting cancer through
metabolism and the most obvious thing
that pops up is is a is a low
carbohydrate diet if cancer cells truly
have damaged mitochondria then when you
shift to a state of ketosis ketones have
to be burned in an intact mitochondrion
if cancer cells don't have that then
they cannot burn that fuel and at the
same time if you restrict glucose which
is obviously their preferred fuel you're
you're inhibiting their growth and so
you're setting up cancer cells for other
therapies to work like traditional chemo
therapies radiation even immunotherapies
so yeah I mean just the first iteration
of these metabolic therapies our dietary
repurposed drugs things like that and
you know it's only gonna get better from
here
yeah and I mean we sort of have an
uphill battle your book here will sort
of outlines the struggle we're gonna
have you having off-label drugs things
like that or just compounds that are
relatively cheap I think you outlined in
your book a case of three broma pyruvate
being very helpful which is you know
something you could buy but I gallon by
four dollars and like that I mean some
of these things that I mean maybe if you
want to tell a story about that real
quick is that people smell some context
on that yeah that's an interesting
compound so that was developed in the in
the lab of Yonko or Peter Peterson at
Johns Hopkins and Peter Peterson he was
he got his PhD under Albert lenninger
who discovered that the mitochondria
were at the site of oxidative
phosphorylation and so he he kind of
took up the this shift and focus towards
bioenergetics he kind of took the baton
for that and picked up where Warburg
left off he started looking at the
bioenergetics of cancer cells and wrote
the seminal review back in the 70s it
just showed how the the metabolic
dysfunction in cancer cells which was a
lot of the basic four basis for Tom's
book but so Yonko she was a grad a
postdoc her research and she entered
Peterson's lab I think in the late 90s
and immediately took up this research
looking at that as a target so if you
look at a cancer cell what what it's
doing is its voraciously consumed
in glucose and then consuming it so fast
that it creates lactic acid and then it
has to dispose of lactic acid so it
operates these little pores called MCT
channels mono carboxylic acid transport
proteins and they allow lactic acid to
leave the cell so it doesn't sort of a
fixie ate itself so cancer cells greatly
up regulate these number of these pores
so that's a functional difference
between a cancer cell and a normal cell
that you can target so young begin
looking at well what molecules could we
use potentially that could slip through
that you know that MCT pore and enter a
cancer cell preferentially and she
screened them and came up with this one
called three bromo pyruvate and pyruvate
is you know very closely structural to
lactic acid so it has no no problem
going through that channel and then it's
a very powerful alkylating agent so it
immediately just goes inside and kind of
wreaks havoc and kills the cell and you
know I've seen these tests at the NCI
did on three bromo pyruvate and I don't
know if there's any other chemo
therapeutic agent that's more efficient
than just killing cancer cells and that
drug given that it's a MCT transporter
that goes through is it something that
so he was a ketogenic adapted or fat
adaptive but after worried about being
as those gonna bring a little bit more
when when you're in acute diet no in
fact I believe her research shows it
that if you fast or do a ketogenic diet
before they admitted its it's actually
better okay and I'm not sure if the
cancer cells you know up regulate more
what it is but I'm actually not sure the
mechanism but it is better so it's not
something you'd have to worry about yeah
no that's a good question though hmm
okay and so she on this it worked way
better and then and then what happened
that so then it got it got bound up in a
legal battle which was ongoing for a
long time so it just was stagnant and
now she finally got funding from a South
Korean pharmaceutical company where and
I just went with her to Wisconsin where
they're doing the Creek the preclinical
toxicology studies so within a matter of
months it's gonna enter finally at their
clinical trials oh wow I didn't know
that yeah yeah this is pretty new so
it's it's on the path
I think you mentioned in the book I mean
that it's it's also just really cheap to
produce I mean didi I think there's any
fear there that you know pharmaceutical
companies aren't going to be able to
monopolize this and charge a ridiculous
amount of money yeah well you know if
young can dictate in the price I
guarantee it's not going to be
outrageous the thing about three but
yeah it is a cheap molecule but it has
to be formulated a certain way by itself
the naked compound is highly toxic yeah
and so she's formulated and with
something's called Co anti-cancer
technology which is you know it's the
proprietary blend that actually makes it
to where it's it's functional okay and
so how much do you think you know as far
as shifting to some of these other
things like you know dichloro acetate or
excited state and in conjunction with
kids gonna die at hyperbaric oxygen
fasting like you said I mean there's an
entire industry set up for treating
cancer right now that has a lot of cash
flowing in and out of it I mean do you
think it's possible to have the standard
of care shift when so many people have
their hands in the pot here yeah that's
that's ground zero for what's wrong with
American medicine right there is is
there's there's no incentives right to
develop these they're very cheap things
sitting right in front of us like
oxaloacetate hyperbaric oxygen things
you named ketogenic diets
there's just no the traditional way as
you get a patent and then pharmaceutical
pharmaceutical companies assure these
things through the series of trials to
win FDA approval and that's you know
north of a billion dollar process so
these there's these huge amount of
firewalls and gatekeeping within
oncology to where standard of care move
you know changes over time so it's an
incredibly slow moving beast that
selects for only things that can be
patented and it leaves behind all these
other things like ketogenic diets the
drugs we have in front of us now that
are generic like metformin dichloro
acetate and there's just no good
mechanism to get these to where the
burden to prove
is enough to where you know oncologists
around the world will say okay yeah
let's let's add that in so that's the
problem and it's incumbent on right now
you know on nonprofits and just kind of
altruistic minded research yes I mean
you make a really good point about some
tips and I think that it really messes a
lot of things up in health care I mean
do you think that government should get
involved here I mean I think that a
government of a nation who has crazy
amount of health care spending like we
do I mean how much of our GDP is on
health care spending like twenty percent
or something ridiculous yeah yeah yeah
it's 20 percent yeah I mean wouldn't we
want that as a government wouldn't you
want that to be lowered I can't think of
anything better for government to do
than that kind of thing because it
everybody benefits right right if you if
you prove that say metformin can prevent
cancer in certain cases or you know
metformin combined with just any
combination with excel Attalla tea and a
ketogenic diets could say increase
median survival by 40% in some type of
cancer I mean that who benefits from
that is the entire populace and it
doesn't increase that 20% GDP in fact
over time it should be able to lower
that that enormous amount we spend on
health care so yeah I can't it's kind of
befuddling the government doesn't step
in and then you you know maybe it's the
fact that the pharmaceutical company has
so much money to lobby Congress you know
things like that who knows right I mean
so as far as I say last day I mean are
you guys doing Z you have an
organization called care ecology where
you're doing a lot of the stuff in in
the foundation that you know are
starting to do some studies here are you
using that or any of these other
modalities as adjuncts with traditional
care how are you talking about yes yeah
that's exactly what we're studying and
we did one study on oxaloacetate with a
ketogenic diet and hyperbaric oxygen
it's a pretty potent effect when those
three were combined in that paper I
think is posted on our website what's
the mechanism exhale acetate you know we
don't honestly it alluded to the fact
that the study alluded to the fact that
if you can restore
or aerobic metabolism in cancer cells
you're not necessarily killing them but
you're sort of creating this dialogue
with them to start behaving normally
interesting yeah I mean you're kind of
recruiting them back into the collective
as somatic tissue to act normally which
makes perfect sense if you look at
cancer as a metabolic disease or an
epigenetic disease where it's not a
fixed disease in other words the the
mutations that are fixed or not driving
it then then you should be able to
manipulate it in a way that cancer cells
that are behaving like cancer cells can
be converted to normal healthy cells and
that's what the data alluded to we're
not exactly sure the mechanism of action
but we did see a pretty robust effect
are there any other ancillary benefits
or side effects to administering a excel
acetate or anything like that
it's just interesting how some of these
things are coming out you know ketogenic
diet hyperbaric oxygen exercise fasting
you know all of these are showing
positive results and also have these
ancillary benefits the side effects are
positive where what we have is far a
standard cure right now you know
obviously yes cancer cells get killed
off and in typical radiation therapy or
other sort of yeah immunologic but it
also is the side effects are negative
for every other cell so I mean looking
at this way it's a sort of facility that
you know we're not looking into these
things more right right you know and tom
says that all the time it's like in the
future that the goal is to come out
healthier than when you came in so if
you could do this theoretically the
right way somebody with cancer would
come out cured and and much healthier
than what they were when they're
diagnosed and you're right that's not
even remotely the case today it's really
telling that you know the chemo
therapies we use today are still based
on the the theoretical underpinnings of
the the original chemos which were war
gases were developed you know during
World War two and they're just these
indiscriminate poisons to go in and lock
up DNA of fast dividing cells they do it
to normal cells you know you have these
these horrific side effects we've gotten
better at managing
attenuating them but it's it's still the
same you know the same process radiation
was developed I think 120 years ago and
it's one of the in most caustic
indiscriminant treatments there is and
and you know there there's so many so
many ancillary side effects to radiation
that it would be nice you're right it
would be nice to at least think there's
a path to get past those in the near
future and then as far as I mean it's a
very complicated topic but as far as
types of cancer now that we you know can
categorize them are there any that these
adjuncts do not work well for that you
wouldn't want to purpose them we're
learning that slowly and you know we get
based on Tom's if you look at Tom's
theory it should theoretically work with
every type of cancer but you know that's
easy to say but we don't have that data
we have there is some data that for
certain leukemias the ketogenic diet may
not be a good idea it may I think there
are some data by Siddhartha Mukerji that
even accelerated the disease breast
cancer we don't know there's there's
conflicting stuff there it seems very
potent for for brain cancers you know
that we do have that data but these
things will all be worked out over time
you know there's different mechanisms of
action that the ketogenic diet we're not
sure if just shifting away from glucose
to ketones as a fuel that may be one
mechanism of action now we know that
made hydroxy butyrate acts as an
epigenetic signaling molecule it
inhibits the Isetta Latian of histones
which changes the expression of genes so
that could be a very potent mechanism of
action changes the quantity of any D in
the cell and nad is used by serotonins
which affect a range of biological
processes you know all these nutrients
ents and pathways like mTOR and ampk are
tripped
so there's all these global effects and
working out you know which mechanisms
action from the ketogenic diet are
working best with cancer that's just
gonna take gonna take time right
I mean this is just for cancer I mean we
have a lot of these other associated
benefits for all these other conditions
as well and that's why I just sort of
laugh when people tell me that the
ketogenic diet is a fad
like it you know it's just some other
name like South Beach or whatever I mean
this is different metabolic state that
is having so many downs from positive
effects that can be helpful in so many
different cases for everything yeah and
I don't know if you know but Richard
Beach died a couple weeks ago and he was
one of the the you know founding
scientists on ketosis and he's been
doing his work at the NIH for basically
his whole life on the ketogenic diet and
it was his contention that you know most
of the maladies that we face in Western
civilization from neuro degeneration to
diabetes to aging in general these could
all be somewhat attenuated by ketogenic
diets or well thought out sort of
exogenous ketones he was always
convinced nobody could do the ketogenic
diet and I don't know if that you know
that just grew up in a different era I
don't think he's slowly I think came
around to the idea that wasn't that
unpalatable and people could actually do
it but yeah it's amazing that the
there's we're just now really uncovering
there's this antiquated form of
metabolism that we forgot about and it's
extraordinarily potent therapeutically
it can do so many things that you know
who knows I mean it could theoretically
chip away at that that 20% GDP we have
in health care like Verta health is
doing a remarkable job just doing the
ketogenic diet for type 2 diabetes but
we could you know go past that and what
if we could start to prove preventative
data for Alzheimer's and all these other
things that afflict you know virtually
everybody yeah I would love to see a
versatile company that addresses cancer
with a similar model of getting people
on in walking him through in this
lifestyle shifting way I think it would
be huge yeah you mean the ability yeah
the ability for them to be able to
collect data and present that and the
sort of the the prelim stuff that
they're coming in with in the last you
know year or two it's been incredible
and nobody else has be able to show that
I mean this is the thing about creating
a business the way that they have to do
it at Mia's obviously a brilliant model
but yeah if someone wants to take on
that challenge of building it for the
verda for cancer yeah please do yeah
do ya take it on I mean you look at the
the modern healthcare system is like
this well it's like IBM it's this old
antiquated tech company that everybody
is passing by they just have not have
not changed their model and so you get
these really nimble kind of innovative
companies like verda that are doing
remarkable thing they're being you know
it's a value-based payment system if
they don't if it doesn't work then they
don't get paid so you know that I I I
have I have a lot of hope for the
American healthcare system because
clever people are starting to figure out
ways to do better and it kind of be sad
you know if you switch to a single-payer
tomorrow
in other words nationalized health care
you could chop off probably 15% of the
waist but then you might lose these
pockets brilliant innovation like brutal
health and Intermountain Healthcare
because you just sort of homogenized it
into one system so I you know I'm
conflicted on what what is the best way
forward I just don't know yeah I mean is
diving in this stuff regarding trip
remember the truth thinking about what
2014 yeah and going into that we just
like what the hell is going on with our
health care system is that way curable
or sort of what was the bridge there to
dive deeper curable you know was I got
involved with a company called care
oncology which just started in the UK
and what they do is they offer for or
repurpose drugs so I mean repurpose
their generic drugs that are indicated
for other diseases so one of them we use
as metformin which is indicated for type
3 diabetes and we offer those looking at
the existing data that the scientists
and the doctors who care in the UK
thought there's plenty of existing
evidence to rationally start treating
patients with this for drug combination
now it was it's we called off-label use
so we're using these drugs for cancer
which is a different indication and then
collect the data kind of like Verta
health collect the data as we go along
and see you know what the impact is and
I love the model because it captures the
price of the generic drugs so all in
those four drugs cost about $60 per
month for a cancer patient it's you know
less than they're probably spending on
supplements
it's metformin and what met well before
we use our metformin doxycycline we use
a lipophilic statin and we use Mabon
dissol an old and anti Helmuth drug and
and that you know that we published a
paper on glioblastoma about six months
ago that showed we had a hundred patient
go hurt when you add these two standard
to care we saw about a doubling and
median overall survival Wow so it's
pretty you know it's significant for
drugs that are that cheap but as I tried
to develop this company in the u.s. you
know I ran into into so much I shouldn't
say I ran into so much there was just a
few times where I was confronted by the
system in a way that was just shocking
and that's what prompted me to kind of
look at the whole you know the whole
medical system incurable and do kind of
a deep dive into what its flaws are well
anymore that some of the things that you
face that were challenging well what I
faced I tried to you know I thought it'd
be wonderful if I could get my hometown
Rapid City South Dakota to sort of buy
into the local regional hospital to send
patients to us and you know develop a
kind of a working relationship with them
so I presented the care model all the
data what we were doing to you know a
group of oncologists in there and one of
the oncologists just flew off the handle
and accused us of taking advantage of
sick people the data that you had from
oh yeah we just walked through all the
data and it was funny because then he
started kind of railing on me about
metformin and one of the medical
oncologists in the coroner said that she
used it for her patients so I just it
struck me in that moment that you could
have such a chasm and knowledge between
oncologists where one is you know
befuddled and angry and the other one
you know is looking at the same data we
are to prescribe this drug off-label so
it just it what it led me to kind of
believe is we've reached this place of
complexity in healthcare where there's
so much data out there so many drugs now
there's about 6,000 approved drugs that
there's outstrips any single individuals
mind to be able to do that efficiently
and so we have to develop systems that
will allow us to not miss things you
know to practice medicine better it but
we're clinging to this kind of
antiquated system that just Millar
written so a doctor has all the autonomy
all the self-reliance you know it's all
put on a single doctors shoulders to
treat patients and we need to I think
you know we need to move past that
system yeah I mean it's so curable is
this book if people haven't checked it
out yet just basically about how you
break down how crazy the healthcare
industry is especially the United States
and I think one of the big points you
made sort of a same thing that going
back to the guy you said you know stead
of freaking out an oncologist is that
the amount of psychology that is
involved with healthcare so which other
an individual doctor level is just
insane from like there's so much of just
human psychology that goes into
manipulating our healthcare system
instead of just looking at the data it's
crazy yeah and I didn't appreciate that
until you know you're really good you
really try to look for the root cause
and that's what it boils down to as
human beings you know we are we are rife
with internal biases and we're not
entirely logical creatures and
especially in a setting where an
emotional setting like medicine where
it's life and death and there's one one
example in the book and the I think it
was the 80s where there was a study
where there was two options for lung
cancer there was surgery and and
radiation and the surgery came with an
increased chance and overall survival
but it also came with a death risk of I
think it was 10% and so when you
presented it to the patient if you said
this has a chance of increasing your
survival and there's a 90% chance you'll
survive it was something like 85% of the
patients opted for the surgery
but if the oncologist just happened to
word in and said this has a chance of
increasing your survival but there's a
10% chance you're gonna die then it was
like 25% of the people would opt for
that for that option so just the way you
use the words changes the way we
evaluate purely pure data you know this
should be evaluated rationally
and that goes on on every day in
medicine we're making you know our
irrational minds are making these
decisions under clouds of uncertainty
and that leads to these kind of you know
these gross inefficiencies we have today
in health care you mean it's the loss
aversion I think heuristic of any means
it happens I'm both a patient side and
the doctor side it correct and the
administrator side the researcher side
everywhere there are all these different
cognitive biases now unfortunately and
so when you start diving in I mean
obviously there's that but we're some
other huge things that you found out
we're just you couldn't believe when you
figured out sort of the root causes yeah
you know the biggest two buckets I think
that I kind of put him in and Cara bull
was the first one that really plagues
American healthcare is the amount of
over treatment we have in general I
think when you when you account in over
treatment and fraud it's about 50% of
the health care that's administered in
the u.s. is is over treatment
unnecessary treatment the tempura GDP
unnecessary it's not only does that lead
to deaths in I think it doesn't just
over treatment isn't just a financial
thing like their their actual emotional
and health consequences to that
absolutely right and if it comes back to
incentives you know every incentive we
have in the system pushes towards over
treatment the legal side where doctors
are afraid of litigation the side where
they they're paid a fee for service
model so every time they they know do a
procedure they get paid and and the data
is really clear on that it's funny you
know the more back surgeons there are in
a certain County the number of back
surgeries goes up by that amount
so so it's not you know the the patients
that really need the surgery it's just
because surgeons are willing to do it
and it's the cut there's there's again
these pockets of innovation like the
Cleveland Clinic and the Mayo Clinic
they realize that and they've switched
their their payment system to salary so
they pay their back surgeons on the
salary now like self-insured companies
like Walmart they won't just let you go
to your local back surgeon
back pain they will actually fly you to
the Mayo Clinic pick you up in a limo
and because it's so the cost savings are
massive because well a salaried surgeon
Mayo Clinic will tell you if you don't
need surgery and send you home yeah yeah
it's pretty crazy I was so in clinical
practice social when I first got at
school and it was just getting in
practice was taking insurance payments
and as far as sort of a fee-for-service
thing not only are people incentivized
to just be especially working in an
insurance model to build through as much
as they can
I'm you just human nature to say okay if
I do this I'll get that back and so you
do that and so for instance if I'm faced
with several different codes and it was
do a lot of musculoskeletal work
especially when it first got out of
school before I sort of transitioned in
a function medicine but that was like
you know let's say I have somebody with
knee pain and I'm assessing them and it
turns out you know they just have hip
tightness or something else but who fi
bill if I do heat on them and manual
therapy and Rehab well then I get you
know three times is more in my in my
visit if I chart that and Bill for that
it's it very thick there is a prime
example of the orbit treatment may be
that person just needed to stretch their
hips a little bit and I could have just
given them a handout and then walk out
and not only that but on the other side
of things
it the insurance company sort of
manipulate how physicians treat and this
isn't just what I was doing but let's
say I'd bill it for a bunch of different
codes I got to a point where like after
a few months of practice like right
after I was almost cool I understood
that
oh okay with you in healthcare if I
build these things I'll get approved so
sometimes if you bill out certain codes
for certain treatment protocols
you only get reimbursed X amount or zero
for certain things for certain
conditions so it's basically they decide
what the treatment protocol is instead
of the physician learning oh if I do
this people are getting better faster
right
right yeah yeah you do you have that
oversight now from insurance companies
so there's all this kind of push back
and forth between yeah and you know I I
didn't want in the book to diminish the
human intuition right which is a magical
thing which doctors
really well intended doctor in a clinic
has got this kind of intuitional wisdom
that has developed over a lifetime and
and if you get this kind of cookbook
medicine where you have protocols and
you have to go by you know then you then
you you you really lose that it that
that gift of intuition that people have
so I think it's trying to find that
balance between finding these systems
that will you know really look at the
data objectively and and allowing a
physician's intuition to to flourish and
I tried to make samples throughout the
book where there were these imaginative
leaps by physicians that just you know
thrust healthcare so far forward but you
couldn't do that without a human being
without good that creativity yeah and
you know these AI programs are getting
insanely good I don't even know if
doctors are even entering radiology
anymore because the AI programs could
diagnose cancer so much better than a
human being
right but they still can't come up with
they still can't they don't know how to
program these machines to be creative
they can do these rote tasks better than
people and it's crazy what they're being
able to do now diagnose melanomas I mean
every melanomas where a you know
oncologists will look at the borders and
say that is definitely the nine or that
is definitely malignant the AI program
will pick up and these ones that we're
there sure are and you know diagnosed in
the proper way
so they'll catch things that human would
never catch but it's I used at the end
of the book I used the example of chess
which I think it was the the 80s or
knows the 90s where deep blue finally
beat Kasparov the reigning chess
champion so computers could beat Hume as
a chess and that's been the case for a
long time but there's this new form of
chess called advanced chess where a
human being in a a a I program will play
together and the human being will pick
up on these very subtleties where the AI
program might not be great and that is
the best pinnacle we've reached at chess
as a human and a machine together so
yeah I mean you know yeah a really good
point I mean this is sort of how I
approach my clinic so for example when I
realize how ridiculous the insurance
game was even that would be paid more if
I stayed in and I completely opted out
and with cash and had people if they
to submit the claims to insurance that
provided never with everything and they
just had a flat fee for everybody so
that I was not incentivized to choose my
treatment model based upon what
insurance would reimburse me and for
what rights so you opt out of that and
then I mean your point around
essentially that you know AI is really
good at taking distilled rules and
executed it on them that's I mean that's
how I sort of scaled my clinic system so
we went from one to six locations rather
quickly and every time I would learn
something new yeah I would distill that
into systems of you know here's how you
assess you know again like if it's a
knee pain this you've somebody comes
with knee pain here so you do assessment
here's what you know treatment protocols
look like and you know we made a really
robust system of treatment but you need
some creativity you need to experiment
to increase the boundaries in and sort
of work at the edges to advance that
forward and this is what you're talking
about I think that was like you know if
we want a I to to read these things
great but to figure out something new
and be creative
takes humans I believe and maybe that
will be the case in 100 years 300 years
but as far as the technology we have now
I mean you sort of need to get you need
to get dirty you need to experiment you
need to be creative and it's time we're
dealing with these sort of life-or-death
things but yeah I mean it's something
that I think because we we sort of live
in this age which is actually fascinated
me in your book you said that I think
this 1947 was when the RCT the
randomized control trial was first made
yeah I I thought I was wait I was like
man it should have been hundreds of
years ago right yeah he was shocking to
me digging in that history how long it
took medicine to really become a science
right and I think that that's reflective
of a lot of things I mean we had no idea
vitalism this idea that the biology
didn't even conform to the laws of
chemistry physics went on for a long
time and so you know why would someone
try to measure something if it was
operating under these laws that we
couldn't even turn in so yeah you know
medicine in particular was held up for a
long long time
yeah the first truly randomized
controlled clinical trial was not until
I think yeah I think you're right I
think it was the late 40s
it's yeah I mean it's sort of ironic now
too that this is sort of the gold
standard and you if we don't have that
now nothing matters right the pendulum
swung too far right I couldn't agree
more and now we have all this kind of
stuff you know this non-standard data
like that we looked at with care on
ecology the you know this is dismissed
but it's it's not as robust as a
randomized control trial but it's not
not relevant and you can you know
there's and there's so much of that data
out there that that it's not no one
person could comb through at all you
know then that's why I think we could be
doing so much better with our patients
if we if we really collaborated more and
try to you know form maybe form
committees that looked at all this
non-standard data and came up with
protocols that were acceptable for you
know most hospitals and people to
implement those and then you can just
capture data over time it's called real
world data but you know if someone's
living if you're beating a disease it
doesn't matter if it's a randomized
controlled trial it just matters if it
shows up in the data yeah we can get the
data later on but it means like you said
it's just it's sort of I mean a lot of
these things are really hard to test and
I understand the flaw epidemiology and
not being able to do that but there has
to be different ways to do it and
relying only on RCTs it's not gonna get
us very far especially cuz how long they
take how expensive they are I mean we're
in an age right now where we can learn
so fast fast in the feedback loop of
data is so quick yet we're using this
this method of science that takes years
is far a design an experiment getting
funding actually executing yet analyzing
yet then publishing it then ain't
getting peer reviewed it's just it's a
it's an acquitted it's terrible you know
you have to do these trials with like a
thousand people because some of the
effects of these drugs are so miniscule
you won't even detect it if it's not
that large for trial and you look at the
biggest you know life-saving things that
people have done throughout medicine
throughout history and one of them is
just for example just this
thrown-together clinical trial I think
it was in the 1700s if I'm right on a
british navy ship
to see what the cause of scurvy or the
treatment for scurvy was scurvy was
killing hundreds of thousands of people
back then he was one of the leading
causes of death and James Lind he just
said well let's try I think it was some
kind of sir filler acid derivative some
malted water you know a few other things
and then and then citrus fruit and he
tried this on twelve twelve of his crew
members with scurvy and the the guys
were given the citrus you know we're
well within a couple days and they were
up helping and so he published that
there was the cure for scurvy and it was
a wrap you know a trial with twelve
people it wasn't randomized and look
what the amount of suffering that
attenuated right this one leap of kind
of imagination and trial and error on
this boat and so yeah I mean we can make
huge inroads by just paying attention
and even small trials where you notice a
big effect that's where the biggest I
think changes are gonna come from still
yeah I think that there's another side
of this coin so I mean you talk a lot in
your book I think you spent a good
amount of time talking about see deaf as
far as it being a problem in the the
treatment for that as far as fecal
transplants go and the all the problems
in that one like this is such a terrible
life-threatening disease and like the
quality let people get when they get CF
is insane I know if you want to chat
maybe a little bit about you know sort
of front to back this this whole thing
yeah yeah that was an interesting story
to that you know this goes back to it
goes back to World War two where the
these the Nazis soldiers were in North
Africa and they were fighting British
and they broke out this this horrible
case of dysentery that swept through all
the soldiers and they noticed that the
Germans notice the local Arabs were not
getting sick and so they flew in all
these chemists and these you know
microbiologist and doctors and they
followed the Arabs and what they noticed
is they were getting sick but the moment
they got sick they walked behind a camel
and as soon as it defecated they'd scoop
it up and eat it
and that's what was you know attenuating
the dysentery and so the the german
scientists they isolated the bacterium
they thought was responsible i was a
camel
and they you know begin to mass-produce
that I think it was called bacillus
subtilis and that was a treatment for
dysentery that was right around the time
where penicillin came out and then they
switched to penicillin right and now of
course ushered in the era of antibiotics
we all know what that was associated
with but there was these moments in time
where talk about you know this intuition
with doctors this guy in the 50s in
Denver he noticed that a lot of his
patients they give him preoperative
antibiotics to attenuate a operative
infection and he noticed a lot of his
patients got c-diff after they recovered
from the surgery and so his idea was he
called it to restore the balance of
nature so he had an intern go to the
maternity ward and collect some faeces
because he's not you know these women
were less likely to be on antibiotics
and he just back then you could do
anything you know a doctor's discretion
you could try anything you wanted so he
took he just gave an enema with his
faeces and was able to cure the c-diff
and he published that in for patients in
the 50s so we knew back as far as then
the fecal transplants were you know
probably could be a cure for c-diff but
we it's a terrible story because I think
15,000 people die a year from CDF about
and 30,000 deaths could be attributed to
CDF so it could go higher than 15 people
who aren't aware what this is
Clostridium difficile I think is the
full name and it's basic just got an
infection that people can get typically
just because they go to the hospital for
a long enough time if you're in hospital
for what 2 to 4 plus weeks the your risk
of just picking this up from being in
the hospital's we extremely high in so
sometimes you can spontaneously resolve
but a lot of times even if people die
yes you can die from it but it mean it's
just it's one of the most brutal things
to have it's like IBS on steroids you're
just constantly having to go to the
bathroom extreme pain extreme
inflammation of the gut and it's pretty
much intolerable for a lot of people
yeah that's horrible and and so that the
you know the first-line treatment is
anime odd
I think those works 75% of the time but
if they don't work then you get stuck in
this loop where you know you basically
spiral down to where you you die you
have a good chance of dying there's less
and less a chance the antibiotics are
gonna work if you fail them the first
time or the second time and so you know
people for people started trying to
figure out what to do and there was a
few doctors doing these fecal
transplants and the results were
incredibly good there just wasn't enough
doctors doing it so it's funny how it
popped up on you know YouTube these duis
on how did your fecal transplants people
were just doing this on their own they
take a spouse or somebody you know take
their their feces and do it for Indiana
blender whip it up and yeah it was as
simple as that you know and the FDA
didn't know how to do it because anytime
there's a treatment they have to do it
as an investor they have to regulate it
as an investigational new drug and if
you do that it comes with so much
bureaucracy that most physicians aren't
willing to take it on and so there was a
meeting at the NIH where they're trying
to decide what to do with these fecal
transplants and the data had just come
out that it was a 96 percent cure rate
right and this is people refractory
people that they're failing antibiotics
and have no option they're probably
gonna die and the FDA is still gonna
regulate it as a drug and they had one
patient there
I can't her name eludes me but she stood
up she had used the fecal transplant
with her husband the cure self and just
sort of brought them back to rationality
this sort of risk-reward relationship
that you don't you know people are gonna
die we're not really worried about
long-term effects yet and so but that
gives you a really good kind of snapshot
about how dysfunctional you know
medicine can be yeah I mean do you want
to basically have a sure death soon or a
long term complication like I think
anybody would choose the the latter
there yeah and these long-term
complications are really nebulous it's
like maybe a chance of weight gain or
weight loss right right yeah so the math
is pretty easy for the people just not
easy for for bureaucrats did you look
much into like how this if there's a
night
deal government that runs their
healthcare as a way that all other
countries and developed world should
because anyone who's doing exceptionally
well I've never really yeah I think
every system has got their problems you
know like the NI and it NHS in England I
think their overall approval rating is
much higher than the US but there's also
a lot of problems and I think what you
look at are the pockets of the places
that are doing it well in the US and one
of those is I think the flagship for
that is Intermountain health in Utah and
they have this wonderful guy Brett James
who really has taken this kind of
systems approach to medicine and working
on incentives and doing the trot you
know the studies that will have big
impact and if the last time I looked at
it if if the US would adopt
Intermountain system of health care
across the u.s. it would immediately be
a reduction of 40% of cost of
expenditure well I mean what are they
doing so differently they're doing well
number one they put their doctors on
salary
so they take away the fee-for-service
right so there's no incentive to over
treat then they just watch the data
excruciating ly close in any place where
you can make an improvement that they
they take their electronic medical
record system when you think about it
that's just a clinical trial in itself
that the data is all there on patient
outcome so you just have to extract the
data from from an e/m electronic medical
record system and you can you know you
can show so much you know for example
they show that nobody knew when the
optimal time to give antibiotics before
surgery is to determine the best
infection rate so doctors around the
u.s. if you looked at the data we're
giving it you know hours before surgery
during surgery or hours or days after
surgery so they just looked at the data
and then extracted it out and found out
the best time I think it's an hour
before surgery and it cuts the infection
rate in half and then when you look at
the amount of cost associated with those
infections that's reduced by half it
equates to you know hundreds of millions
of dollars right away
and so it's just little things like that
they optimize over time that you know
results in these massive reductions or
increases in efficiency in reductions
and expense yeah I mean so I think you
pointed in the book as well about a
couple different examples regarding how
we have a lot of these systems already
that work we know of you know washing
hands certain IV procedures etc that
when done the infection rate the cost
etc is completely wiped away yet most
people just don't do it still I mean
what what is going on there and so even
if we have this interim system as far as
you know could reduce 40% then do you
have any idea what the path is to get
that widespread adoption without forcing
this on physicians to do certain things
and then taking away that creativity and
intuition like we were mentioning before
that's ground zero for it that's the
fundamental you know question of doing
this and the reason Brad James is so
good at it is because he appreciates
that delicate psychology you know
doctors don't come out of med school to
be told what to do they want to practice
medicine and so the way he does it is he
has the doctors sort of sponsor these
studies and then when they get this
outcome data like for example with the
antibiotics the doctors will then tell
their peers about them instead of like
top-down management telling them what to
do they just kind of put peer pressure
on each other and he facilitates that
peer pressure he'll like congratulate
them and tell you gotta tell every you
know he just sort of manipulates them
into you know kind of policing each
other and so it's a it's a brilliant way
to do it I think you know I I don't know
if you could adopt that as a structure
nationwide but that that's kind of what
he's done at Intermountain yeah I mean
this is one of things that sort of blows
my mind around healthcare in general is
that there's no way for people to learn
from other people if were so like you
said before we're very specialized so
different providers are just very
specialized in what they do which I
think can be a good thing if we're
learning from each other but we're not
people stay in their silos and we don't
share any information like with was
seeing how social media works right now
the fact that we don't have
some sort of network for physicians
where everybody sort of agrees like okay
like this is how we treat this thing and
this is what's working let's share this
case study etc and maybe maybe there
something that exists I've never seen it
before
I mean just like as far as my clinic
systems when we had that going on five
six seven clinicians it was you the
ability to learn from four three four or
five people once a week about what
they're doing is it's game-changing your
feedback loop just it gets so much
better and so much faster and you just
become a way better clinician imagine if
we had hundreds of thousands of
physicians doing the same thing okay I
don't know if the incentives work that
way and this is sort of where it comes
down to it we're just giving people
salaries maybe they're not incentivize
and get people better faster and I don't
know if we need to create some sort of
system where it's an outcome based
system and you know fee for outcomes
where people are incentivized to keep
people out of their clinic faster
instead of just saying okay well I don't
have to over treat but I don't have to
get them better either and I either way
I get paid yeah there there's there is a
you know some thoughts around that and
the latest incarnation of that is I
think they're doing in a few primary
care large primary care clinics you know
the frontline medicine and what they do
is they give these guys a bolus of cash
based on the number of patients they're
gonna have so they'll get you know X
amount per patient at one time in one
lump sum at the beginning of the year
and now think about that the incentive
for all those doctors is to keep those
patients as healthy as possible and keep
them out of the system yes so where is
every nun I think it's in Tennessee
Marty McKay wrote a book the price we
pay it's a great book it's kind of like
curable it's a kind of a top-down look
at the health care system and he talked
about that and that any in that book but
yeah it just you know instantly shifts
every the doctors till trying to you
know not doing excessive procedures but
also trying to keep their patients
healthy and out of the system yeah I
mean one of the sort of fantasies that
I've had about again left some some way
to help this stuff just like the the
verdure for cancer we fed and have
several business
I'd start tackling some of these things
but I mean what another one would be
creating some sort of a network where
people could post their health problems
their conditions etc and and sort of
post a bounty for him positions could go
on there and say okay I can you know
they wouldn't get paid unless they got
that person better so for instance if
somebody was on there saying oh I have
to shoulder pain when I reach overhead
or pushes the giver head you know a
really good physical therapist could go
oh yeah I'll take that and it would be
$1500 I'll pay $1,500 for somebody to
get this better and then it was really
big you gonna be big oh I know how to
get that better and if they don't they
don't get paid but if they do then they
get paid that's attached yes yes exactly
I think there's a lot of people at this
day and age that just aren't getting
better for so many different reasons I
mean so many people will come to my
clinic and it would be their 5th 6th 7th
8th 9th different doctor that they've
seen they're waiting to get surgery they
want to try something different and and
then I you know not saying that I got
everybody better all the time but a lot
things that we did we could get people
better in a week or two and if you know
people were with years and years of
problems right and there's one guy that
he had such bad inflammation in the
tendons in his fingers and he basically
straighten or clenched a fist and he's
been like he was like this five or
six years and he was about to go get
surgery the next week and I just did
some soft tissue work and gave him some
rehab exercises for his form in his
elbow cuz he was working on his computer
he had been in this really weird
position we changed the position it's in
soft tissue work and he had full
function of his hands and they go in
like two weeks and that guy I'm sure
would have paid ten thousand dollars to
get that better right yeah and so this
is where I think that if we you know if
we were to create some sort of a
marketplace then it would actually allow
people to specialize even more in a good
way I mean this is when a peak like
somebody could just triple down on being
the world's best you know fit you know
finger anatomist in rehab specialist and
then everybody with a finger probably
would just see that you'd always been in
the highest price there and it was sort
of like weed out the the people who are
ineffective and put the cream of crop up
and then you could have reviews for all
the people that have been cured right so
you could see the outcomes yeah and you
could also collect all that data you
know what is this person who is taking
all these $10,000 cases and getting
people better immediately doing that
other people aren't doing that's a great
idea yeah you think about these clever
ways to incentivize people you know to
do it and tease out these really you
know innovative methods of healing that
don't catch on I mean if the fecal
transplant was known for for 50 years
that he could do that be a cure but it
didn't catch on think how many other
things you know one thing that really
interests me right now is this notion
that a carnivore diet can treat
autoimmunity mm-hmm it's pretty bold and
your mouth doesn't cardboard I hear I'm
so I'm so intrigued by it that I don't
know I mean I I I'm I'm attracted to
these ideas that are so far out of the
box that they're people look at it and
think that it's worst thing in the world
but then you know the carnivore diet to
me there's too much antidotal data and
evidence that it's doing something and
with auto immunity right I don't know if
like you know Paul solid you know like
he claims that it's this optimal human
diet I don't know if that's the case and
I I think that's gonna be really
difficult to prove and he's kind of has
this blanket theoretical argument that
because you know you detoxify plants
that net-net they're always bad and I
don't think you can make that claim and
I think the reason is is the mechanism
of actions we don't know like you know
for example curcumin yeah you don't
absorb it well and you do detoxify and
get rid of it but lots of these
therapeutic things are coming from a
modulation of the gut biome and and for
example the ketogenic diet we always
thought it you know we still don't know
why it treats pediatric epilepsy so well
is that the beta-hydroxybutyrate is it
the change in neurotransmitters there
was a study done where mice on a
ketogenic diet you know they've treated
these epileptic model of mice they give
them a ketogenic diet they're cured then
transfer their gut biome to another
Mouse that's had antibiotics so they're
got biome sterile you give them the gut
biome of the mouse on the ketogenic diet
they stop having seizures so there's
something with the gut biome that's
carrying the anti-seizure we know that
with metformin it's doing something that
got by on this lowering blood glucose so
to categorically say they're bad because
they're detoxified ignores the fact that
they may be beneficial in the with the
gut biome really yeah Paul is a good
friend of mine anymore actually just
hanging out last weekend chatting him
through a lot of stuff and very heated
debates and I'm sort of with it as far
as it obviously being a clear tool my
opinion is that in general carnivore is
you know it's essentially just gut reset
protocol and this is not a very
different so what am I started doing you
know moving from doing my must must go
cell to work to doing more functional
mess and stuff and treating gut issues I
mean the biggest thing that we put
people on is basically very very low if
not completely eradicated fiber fiber
diet so you take out all things that
people have to judge ask if that got a
break to reset and then so you basically
remove stuff and then allow it to just
calm down and then repopulate it but one
of the things that's not happening here
that and then people are thinking of
very clearly is that carnivore diet
great you're gonna remove it you know
you're not gonna have the insults but
there's this whole process of healing
that you know people like Michael rusia
expert in this could talk way more way
better than I could but I mean when
you're when you're repopulating you're
not doing this in a carnivore diet so
basically removing the offensive thing
if it's plants okay I got it but why was
it that way in the first place and not
thinking like okay well can we add these
foods back I mean I just think that
fundamentally I mean I post this on
Twitter like a week or so ago of
controversial opinion that have is that
humans are omnivores like we should be
able to eat plants and not have a crazy
autoimmune response and if that's the
case we need to ask ourselves what is
wrong with either what we're eating or
our body and are we fixing if we can't
go back to that that's what I'm curious
on you know like yes of course that's
removed this the the thing that's
offensive so we can start healing but
don't we want to don't we want to go
like have the goal of
if you don't want to eat plants that's
totally fine I'm I'm sort of diagnostic
if you won't eat only plant-based or
only meat based I don't care but you
should be able to eat both about getting
sick yeah and I think you know what
you're doing there kind of brings me to
this notion of seasonality maybe like
this concept of a gut reset maybe we
were designed to do that and it was kind
of forced upon us mmm every year you
know during the winter time when your
only option you would say a mammoth and
there was no really plants to eat so
maybe you just you know Verdun they got
that kind of reset every year and then
you were able to tolerate the plant it
looks to me like you know having a it's
a building process to where you're just
you're constantly in a date in yourself
with probably too much fiber and then
you get to where you have a leaky gut
and then you get into trouble without
immunity yeah but maybe maybe we're
designed just to have those during a
certain season yeah I mean like sort of
like you're saying to like we just have
so many environmental talks and some
problems that we're dealing with on a
day-to-day basis now to that but we're
you know we're doing that and then the
vegetables that we are eating are so far
from what we used to eat and the variety
is so narrow and so now we're eating
mass-produced stuff that is you know is
not at all close to what we used to be
eating whereas animals are very close to
what we've been eating for the last
several million years whereas plants
those are very very different plants are
very very different in the broad like we
don't you know I agree that they're like
plants all have toxins to some degree I
don't think that that's inherently bad I
think that same thing like working out
tears your muscle fiber it doesn't mean
it's bad it just means like I'm not
gonna it's the same thing of thinking
about plants in a way like we eat maybe
the regular human who eats some plants
now which like average American probably
eats very few but let's say that you
like carrots celery
you know broccoli in peas or something
like that like they have like four
vegetables they eat you're having like
kale smoothies every single day that's
sick saying Oh working out it's good so
I'm gonna do I'm gonna run 50 miles a
day and there's some freaks who do that
get away with that or like I'm gonna do
heavy squats every single day and then
uni starts hurting and you're like
what's going on here same thing with
with your gut in plants it's like eating
the same exact things that are sort of
unnatural to even exist in the first
place of course something's gonna go
wrong
yeah and so yeah I mean the how I sort
of approach plants is just like you said
eating local and seasonal I think that
two people can probably think towards
you know it depends on where your
genetics are from but in general I think
that eating local and seasonal for your
genes less from where you live probably
makes the most amount of sense
I think it's tough for a lot of people's
because the the modernization of the
human population is sort of getting to a
point where it's hard to sort of
approximate but in general like you know
I'm European of the descent right that's
very different from African descent
where it probably makes sense to eat a
lot more fiber and they've shown that in
studies as well so I mean it's obviously
a little complicated but I again I would
say that I'm of camp omnivore and that
if you can't eat plants that's you know
if you if you go to a corner for diet
for two years and then try to eat plants
again still can't eat plants I could say
the something wrong with you and you
need to figure that out work with a
professional to do that maybe maybe go
on my new software that I launched soon
and find the marketplace for somebody
who can help you the most if there are
any AG web developers anybody who wants
to take this on
reach out to me and maybe we'll will
kick it off but I have no time right now
but sort of getting out of the tangent
so we'll cap it at that thanks for
coming on the show is there anywhere you
want to send people to maybe learn more
about your work other than to books you
have you know I really like the
foundation that that's that's been kind
of what is on lately it's a foundation
for metabolic cancer therapies got it
and we'll put a link in the show notes
as well if people want to just click
through that perfect
appreciate that well thanks well work
you're doing thanks for being on the
show today and taking the time
absolutely thanks for having me have a
take care thanks for listening to this
episode of the natural state podcast I
hope you enjoyed it and if you did I'd
really appreciate you heading over to
whatever service you're listening to
this podcast on dropping me a 5 star
review and your thoughts on the show
this helps us get discovered by more
people and spreading the good gospel of
health and if you want to stay plugged
into all my self health experiments
recent research in books that I'm
reading in my interpretations of those
things products that I'm testing and
dots on all things related to
check out my free weekly newsletter
called the feed you can sign up for that
at dr antony Gustin comm slash the feed
that's dr. Anton Agustin comm / the feed
thanks again for tuning in in your
support of the natural state podcast